 Goldenseal: Usefulness and Safety | NCCIH Skip to main content Link to External Link Policy An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know NIH Websites Are Changing NIH is moving the launch of its new website to the fall to ensure the best possible experience for everyone who relies on our websites for health information, research, funding opportunities, and other resources. Get the Latest Updates and FAQs . U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Información en Español National Center for Complementary and Integrative Health Health Info Health Info Home Topics A-Z What Is Complementary, Alternative, or Integrative Health? Pain Herbs at a Glance Know the Science Safety Information Resources for Health Care Professionals Tips on Complementary Health Statistics on Use Research Research Home Research Results by Date NCCIH Research Blog Division of Extramural Research Sponsored by NCCIH Division of Intramural Research Conducted at NCCIH Resources for Researchers Clinical Trials NIH Pain Research Center Grants & Funding Grants & Funding Home Overview: What NCCIH Funds Funding Opportunities Clinical Trial Funding Grant Policies & Guidance Application Resources Program Directors Clinical Research Toolbox Types of Grants and Contracts Small Business Research Grant Program (SBIR) General Award Mechanisms Training Training Home About Research Training and Career Development Awards & Opportunities Institutional Training Sites Training Grant Application, Review, and Award Process More Training Resources CME/CEU and Online Lectures Online Continuing Education Series Distinguished Lecture Series Integrative Medicine Research Lecture Series News & Events News & Events Home Press Releases Alerts & Advisories Events Videos NCCIH Clinical Digest About NCCIH About NCCIH Home Organizational Structure Advisory Council Partnerships Director’s Page Strategic Plans & Reports Budget & Legislation Job Opportunities Get Involved Maps & Directions National Center for Complementary and Integrative Health Search Menu Search Search Health Info Health Info Home Topics A-Z What Is Complementary, Alternative, or Integrative Health? Pain Herbs at a Glance Know the Science Safety Information Resources for Health Care Professionals Tips on Complementary Health Statistics on Use Research Research Home Research Results by Date NCCIH Research Blog Division of Extramural Research Sponsored by NCCIH Division of Intramural Research Conducted at NCCIH Resources for Researchers Clinical Trials NIH Pain Research Center Grants & Funding Grants & Funding Home Overview: What NCCIH Funds Funding Opportunities Clinical Trial Funding Grant Policies & Guidance Application Resources Program Directors Clinical Research Toolbox Types of Grants and Contracts Small Business Research Grant Program (SBIR) General Award Mechanisms Training Training Home About Research Training and Career Development Awards & Opportunities Institutional Training Sites Training Grant Application, Review, and Award Process More Training Resources CME/CEU and Online Lectures Online Continuing Education Series Distinguished Lecture Series Integrative Medicine Research Lecture Series News & Events News & Events Home Press Releases Alerts & Advisories Events Videos NCCIH Clinical Digest About NCCIH About NCCIH Home Organizational Structure Advisory Council Partnerships Director’s Page Strategic Plans & Reports Budget & Legislation Job Opportunities Get Involved Maps & Directions Home Health Information Goldenseal Goldenseal © Steven Foster Common Names: goldenseal, yellow root, goldenroot, yellow pucoon Latin Names: Hydrastis canadensis Background Goldenseal is a plant native to the northeastern United States and southeastern Canada. It has a bright yellow rhizome (underground stem). Wild goldenseal has been overharvested and is available in limited amounts. The plant is grown commercially but is expensive to cultivate. Historically, Native Americans used goldenseal to treat a variety of conditions, such as digestive disorders, wounds, skin and eye conditions, and cancer. Currently, goldenseal is promoted as a dietary supplement for the common cold and other upper respiratory tract infections, hay fever, diarrhea, constipation, and other conditions. How Much Do We Know? There is not enough evidence to determine whether goldenseal is useful for any health conditions. More research would be needed before any conclusions can be reached. What Have We Learned? No rigorous studies have been done to evaluate the effects of goldenseal on health conditions in people. Berberine, a substance found in goldenseal, has been studied for its effects on blood sugar, blood cholesterol levels, body weight, and other health-related outcomes. However, when people take goldenseal orally (by mouth), very little berberine may be absorbed by the body, so study results on berberine may not apply to goldenseal. What Do We Know About Safety? In small research studies, goldenseal has been administered at doses of about 3 g per day for short periods of time without serious harmful effects. The safety of taking goldenseal for longer periods is uncertain. Some commercial goldenseal products have been found to contain other herbs or ingredients not listed on the label in addition to or instead of goldenseal. Goldenseal may change the way your body processes many medications. For example, a study funded by the National Center for Complementary and Integrative Health (NCCIH) found that levels of metformin—the most commonly prescribed diabetes medicine—decreased about 25 percent in healthy adults who were given goldenseal extract plus metformin. This drop was enough to potentially hinder glucose control in people with type 2 diabetes taking metformin. If you take any type of medicine, talk with your health care provider before using goldenseal or other herbal products; some herbs and medicines interact in harmful ways. Women who are pregnant or breastfeeding should not use goldenseal, and it should not be given to infants. The berberine constituent of goldenseal can be harmful to newborns. Keep in Mind Take charge of your health—talk with your health care providers about any complementary health approaches you use. Together, you can make shared, well-informed decisions. Federal Regulation of Herbal Products Depending on what’s in them, how they’re intended to be used, and how they’re administered (orally or topically), herbal products are regulated in a variety of ways. Many herbal products intended for oral use are marketed as dietary supplements. The rules for making and distributing dietary supplements are less strict than those for drugs. Unlike drugs, dietary supplements are not approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) before they are sold to the public. When public health concerns arise about the safety of a dietary supplement or an ingredient including an herb, the FDA can take action to protect the public. Manufacturers and distributors of supplements are responsible for evaluating the safety and labeling of their products before marketing to ensure that they meet all regulatory requirements. For More Information Using Dietary Supplements Wisely Know the Science: How Medications and Supplements Can Interact Know the Science: How To Make Sense of a Scientific Journal Article NCCIH Clearinghouse The NCCIH Clearinghouse provides information on NCCIH and complementary and integrative health approaches, including publications and searches of Federal databases of scientific and medical literature. The Clearinghouse does not provide medical advice, treatment recommendations, or referrals to practitioners. Toll-free in the U.S.: 1-888-644-6226 Telecommunications relay service (TRS): 7-1-1 Website: https://www.nccih.nih.gov Email: info@nccih.nih.gov (link sends email) PubMed® A service of the National Library of Medicine, PubMed® contains publication information and (in most cases) brief summaries of articles from scientific and medical journals. For guidance from NCCIH on using PubMed, see How To Find Information About Complementary Health Practices on PubMed . Website: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/ Office of Dietary Supplements (ODS), National Institutes of Health (NIH) ODS seeks to strengthen knowledge and understanding of dietary supplements by evaluating scientific information, supporting research, sharing research results, and educating the public. Its resources include publications (such as Dietary Supplements: What You Need To Know ) and fact sheets on a variety of specific supplement ingredients and products (such as vitamin D and multivitamin/mineral supplements). Website: https://ods.od.nih.gov Email: ods@nih.gov (link sends email) Key References Asher GN, Corbett AH, Hawke RL. Common herbal dietary supplement-drug interactions . American Family Physician . 2017;96(2):101-107. Gafner S, Blumenthal M, Foster S, et al. Botanical ingredient forensics: detection of attempts to deceive commonly used analytical methods for authenticating herbal dietary and food ingredients and supplements . Journal of Natural Products. 2023;86(2):460-472. Goldenseal. NatMed Pro website. Accessed at naturalmedicines.therapeuticresearch.com on January 18, 2024. [Database subscription]. Gurley BJ, Gardner SF, Hubbard MA, et al. In vivo effects of goldenseal, kava kava, black cohosh, and valerian on human cytochrome P450 1A2, 2D6, 2E1, and 3A4 phenotypes . Clinical Pharmacology and Therapeutics. 2005;77(5):415-426. Gurley BJ, Swain A, Barone GW, et al. Effect of goldenseal (Hydrastis canadensis) and kava kava (Piper methysticum) supplementation on digoxin pharmacokinetics in humans . Drug Metabolism and Disposition. 2007;35(2):240-245. Gurley BJ, Swain A, Hubbard MA, et al. Supplementation with goldenseal (Hydrastis canadensis), but not kava kava (Piper methysticum), inhibits human CYP3A activity in vivo . Clinical Pharmacology and Therapeutics. 2008;83(1):61-69. Mandal SK, Maji AK, Mishra SK, et al. Goldenseal ( Hydrastis canadensis L.) and its active constituents: a critical review of their efficacy and toxicological issues . Pharmacological Research. 2020;160:105085. Nguyen JT, Tian D-D, Tanna RS, et al. An integrative approach to elucidate mechanisms underlying the pharmacokinetic goldenseal-midazolam interaction: application of in vitro assays and physiologically based pharmacokinetic models to understand clinical observations . Journal of Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics. 2023;387(3):252-264. Nguyen JT, Tian D-D, Tanna RS, et al. Assessing transporter-mediated natural product-drug interactions via in vitro-in vivo extrapolation: clinical evaluation with a probe cocktail. Clinical Pharmacology and Therapeutics. 2021;109(5):1342-1352. Wallace ED, Oberlies NH, Cech NB, et al. Detection of adulteration in Hydrastis canadensis (goldenseal) dietary supplements via untargeted mass spectrometry-based metabolomics . Food and Chemical Toxicology . 2018;120:439-447. Zamani M, Zarei M, Nikbaf-Shandiz M, et al. The effects of berberine supplementation on cardiovascular risk factors in adults: a systematic review and dose-response meta-analysis . Frontiers in Nutrition. 2022;9:1013055. This publication is not copyrighted and is in the public domain. Duplication is encouraged. NCCIH has provided this material for your information. It is not intended to substitute for the medical expertise and advice of your health care provider(s). We encourage you to discuss any decisions about treatment or care with your health care provider. The mention of any product, service, or therapy is not an endorsement by NCCIH. Last Updated: February 2025 Share Email Facebook X © Steven Foster Related Topics Herbs at a Glance HerbList App Related Fact Sheets Using Dietary Supplements Wisely Follow NIH: Contact Us X X Facebook Facebook LinkedIn LinkedIn YouTube YouTube Follow NCCIH: Subscribe to our email update Email Updates NCCIH Home National Institutes of Health U.S. Department of Health & Human Services USA.gov 9000 Rockville Pike Bethesda, Maryland 20892 Privacy and Policies Accessibility FOIA Vulnerability Disclosure en Español Site Map NCCIH Website Archive NIH...Turning Discovery Into Health ® Site Last Updated: September 29, 2026 Follow NIH: X X Facebook Facebook LinkedIn LinkedIn YouTube YouTube Follow NCCIH: Subscribe to our email update Email Updates Contact Us Privacy and Policies Accessibility FOIA Vulnerability Disclosure en Español Site Map Archive NCCIH Home National Institutes of Health U.S. Department of Health & Human Services USA.gov 9000 Rockville Pike Bethesda, Maryland 20892 NIH...Turning Discovery Into Health ® Site Last Updated: 