 Hawthorn: Usefulness and Safety | NCCIH Skip to main content Link to External Link Policy An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know NIH Websites Are Changing NIH is moving the launch of its new website to the fall to ensure the best possible experience for everyone who relies on our websites for health information, research, funding opportunities, and other resources. Get the Latest Updates and FAQs . U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Información en Español National Center for Complementary and Integrative Health Health Info Health Info Home Topics A-Z What Is Complementary, Alternative, or Integrative Health? Pain Herbs at a Glance Know the Science Safety Information Resources for Health Care Professionals Tips on Complementary Health Statistics on Use Research Research Home Research Results by Date NCCIH Research Blog Division of Extramural Research Sponsored by NCCIH Division of Intramural Research Conducted at NCCIH Resources for Researchers Clinical Trials NIH Pain Research Center Grants & Funding Grants & Funding Home Overview: What NCCIH Funds Funding Opportunities Clinical Trial Funding Grant Policies & Guidance Application Resources Program Directors Clinical Research Toolbox Types of Grants and Contracts Small Business Research Grant Program (SBIR) General Award Mechanisms Training Training Home About Research Training and Career Development Awards & Opportunities Institutional Training Sites Training Grant Application, Review, and Award Process More Training Resources CME/CEU and Online Lectures Online Continuing Education Series Distinguished Lecture Series Integrative Medicine Research Lecture Series News & Events News & Events Home Press Releases Alerts & Advisories Events Videos NCCIH Clinical Digest About NCCIH About NCCIH Home Organizational Structure Advisory Council Partnerships Director’s Page Strategic Plans & Reports Budget & Legislation Job Opportunities Get Involved Maps & Directions National Center for Complementary and Integrative Health Search Menu Search Search Health Info Health Info Home Topics A-Z What Is Complementary, Alternative, or Integrative Health? Pain Herbs at a Glance Know the Science Safety Information Resources for Health Care Professionals Tips on Complementary Health Statistics on Use Research Research Home Research Results by Date NCCIH Research Blog Division of Extramural Research Sponsored by NCCIH Division of Intramural Research Conducted at NCCIH Resources for Researchers Clinical Trials NIH Pain Research Center Grants & Funding Grants & Funding Home Overview: What NCCIH Funds Funding Opportunities Clinical Trial Funding Grant Policies & Guidance Application Resources Program Directors Clinical Research Toolbox Types of Grants and Contracts Small Business Research Grant Program (SBIR) General Award Mechanisms Training Training Home About Research Training and Career Development Awards & Opportunities Institutional Training Sites Training Grant Application, Review, and Award Process More Training Resources CME/CEU and Online Lectures Online Continuing Education Series Distinguished Lecture Series Integrative Medicine Research Lecture Series News & Events News & Events Home Press Releases Alerts & Advisories Events Videos NCCIH Clinical Digest About NCCIH About NCCIH Home Organizational Structure Advisory Council Partnerships Director’s Page Strategic Plans & Reports Budget & Legislation Job Opportunities Get Involved Maps & Directions Home Health Information Hawthorn Hawthorn © Steven Foster Common Names: hawthorn, hawthorne, harthorne, English hawthorn, Mexican hawthorn, raiz de tejocote, tejocote, shanzha, WS 1442 Latin Names: Crataegus monogyna , Crataegus mexicana , Crataegus pinnatifida (synonym Crataegus oxycantha ) , Crataegus laevigata Background Hawthorn is a flowering shrub or tree of the rose family. It grows in temperate regions throughout the world. Hawthorn was traditionally used for heart disease, digestion, blood circulation, and kidney and bladder problems. It was also traditionally used for topical (on the skin) purposes, such as for sores, itching, and frostbite. Today, hawthorn is promoted for the heart and blood vessels, weight loss, and for conditions like anxiety. How Much Do We Know? We have little or no quality evidence on hawthorn for most health conditions. Hawthorn has been studied for heart failure in people. Heart failure is a condition in which the heart can’t pump as much blood as it should. The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has warned the public about several hawthorn root dietary supplements labeled “tejocote root” (Mexican hawthorn, C. mexicana) because the products actually contain yellow oleander, a toxic plant. What Have We Learned? There is conflicting evidence on the effects of hawthorn in people with heart failure. There isn’t enough evidence to know whether hawthorn affects heart disease, angina (chest pain or discomfort from a lack of blood flow to the heart), abnormal heartbeat, or the buildup of plaque in arteries. There isn’t any evidence to suggest that hawthorn affects weight loss. It’s unclear whether hawthorn affects anxiety. What Do We Know About Safety? In January 2024, the FDA published a list of products, including dietary supplements labeled “tejocote root” (C. mexicana), that actually contain yellow oleander, a toxic plant known to cause harm to the nervous system, heart, stomach, and intestines. The FDA warned that these products may cause severe harm or even be fatal. Before the FDA published its warning, some people were consuming these products for weight loss. One study indicated that a specific preparation of hawthorn (C. oxycantha) may have caused early risk of heart failure progression in patients. It’s unclear why, but one possibility is that hawthorn might have interacted with drugs the patients were taking. Some hawthorn supplements might be safe in the short term. No research studies have tested whether it is safe to use hawthorn for more than 16 weeks. Side effects of hawthorn can include dizziness, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, and muscle pain. Little is known about whether it’s safe to use hawthorn during pregnancy or while breastfeeding. Keep in Mind Take charge of your health—talk with your health care providers about any complementary health approaches you use. Together, you can make shared, well-informed decisions. If you take any type of medicine, talk with your health care provider before using any herbal product; some herbs and medicines interact in harmful ways. Federal Regulation of Herbal Products Depending on what’s in them, how they’re intended to be used, and how they’re administered (orally or topically), herbal products are regulated in a variety of ways. Many herbal products intended for oral use are marketed as dietary supplements. The regulatory paths for making and distributing dietary supplements are different than those for drugs. Unlike drugs, dietary supplements are not approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) before they are sold to the public. When public health concerns arise about the safety of a dietary supplement or an ingredient including an herb, the FDA can take action to protect the public. Manufacturers and distributors of supplements are responsible for evaluating the safety and labeling of their products before marketing to ensure that they meet all regulatory requirements. For More Information Using Dietary Supplements Wisely Know the Science: How Medications and Supplements Can Interact Know the Science: How To Make Sense of a Scientific Journal Article NCCIH Clearinghouse The NCCIH Clearinghouse provides information on NCCIH and complementary and integrative health approaches, including publications and searches of Federal databases of scientific and medical literature. The Clearinghouse does not provide medical advice, treatment recommendations, or referrals to practitioners. Toll-free in the U.S.: 1-888-644-6226 Telecommunications relay service (TRS): 7-1-1 Website: https://www.nccih.nih.gov Email: info@nccih.nih.gov (link sends email) PubMed® A service of the National Library of Medicine, PubMed® contains publication information and (in most cases) brief summaries of articles from scientific and medical journals. For guidance from NCCIH on using PubMed, see How To Find Information About Complementary Health Practices on PubMed . Website: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/ Office of Dietary Supplements (ODS), National Institutes of Health (NIH) ODS seeks to strengthen knowledge and understanding of dietary supplements by evaluating scientific information, supporting research, sharing research results, and educating the public. Its resources include publications (such as Dietary Supplements: What You Need To Know ) and fact sheets on a variety of specific supplement ingredients and products (such as vitamin D and multivitamin/mineral supplements). Website: https://ods.od.nih.gov Email: ods@nih.gov (link sends email) Key References Espinosa J, Bassett R, Lucerna A, et al. Hawthorn root (Crataegus mexicana) toxicity . American Journal of Emergency Medicine . 2024;78:242.e5-242.e6. Hawthorn. Drugs and Lactation Database. (LactMed). National Institute of Child Health and Human Development. Updated February 15, 2021. Accessed at ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK501831/ on October 4, 2024. Hawthorn. NatMed Pro website. Accessed at naturalmedicines.therapeuticresearch.com on October 1, 2024. [Database subscription]. Holubarsch CJF, Colucci WS, Eha J. Benefit-risk assessment of Crataegus extract WS 1442: an evidence-based review . American Journal of Cardiovascular Drugs . 2018;18(1):25-36. Koch E, Busse WR, Juretzek W, et al. Hawthorn. In: Coates PM, Betz JM, Blackman MR, et al., eds. Encyclopedia of Dietary Supplements. 2nd ed. New York, NY: Informa Healthcare; 2010:411-422. Niederseer D, Ledl-Kurkowski E, Kvita K, et al. Safety and effects of Crataegus extract WS 1442 and Nordic walking on lipid profile and endothelial function: a randomized, partially blinded pilot study in overweight volunteers . Acta Clinica Croatica. 2019;58(4):604-614. Palmer KG, Lebin JA, Cronin MT, et al. Crataegus mexicana (tejocote) exposure associated with cardiotoxicity and a falsely elevated digoxin level . Journal of Medical Toxicology . 2019;15:295-298. Pittler MH, Guo R, Ernst E. Hawthorn extract for treating chronic heart failure . Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews. 2008;(1):CD005312. Accessed at cochranelibrary.com on October 1, 2024. Trexler SE, Nguyen E, Gromek SM, et al. Electrocardiographic effects of hawthorn (Crataegus oxycantha) in healthy volunteers: a randomized controlled trial . Phytotherapy Research . 2018;32(8):1642-1646. U.S. Food and Drug Administration. FDA Issues Warning About Certain Supplements Substituted With Toxic Yellow Oleander (January 2024). Accessed at fda.gov/food/alerts-advisories-safety-information/fda-issues-warning-about-certain-supplements-substituted-toxic-yellow-oleander-january-2024 on January 2, 2025. Zick SM, Gillespie B, Aaronson KD. The effect of Crataegus oxycantha special extract WS 1422 on clinical progression in patients with mild to moderate symptoms of heart failure . European Journal of Heart Failure . 2008;10(6):587-593. This publication is not copyrighted and is in the public domain. Duplication is encouraged. NCCIH has provided this material for your information. It is not intended to substitute for the medical expertise and advice of your health care provider(s). We encourage you to discuss any decisions about treatment or care with your health care provider. The mention of any product, service, or therapy is not an endorsement by NCCIH. Last Updated: April 2025 Share Email Facebook X © Steven Foster Related Topics Herbs at a Glance HerbList App Follow NIH: Contact Us X X Facebook Facebook LinkedIn LinkedIn YouTube YouTube Follow NCCIH: Subscribe to our email update Email Updates NCCIH Home National Institutes of Health U.S. Department of Health & Human Services USA.gov 9000 Rockville Pike Bethesda, Maryland 20892 Privacy and Policies Accessibility FOIA Vulnerability Disclosure en Español Site Map NCCIH Website Archive NIH...Turning Discovery Into Health ® Site Last Updated: September 29, 2026 Follow NIH: X X Facebook Facebook LinkedIn LinkedIn YouTube YouTube Follow NCCIH: Subscribe to our email update Email Updates Contact Us Privacy and Policies Accessibility FOIA Vulnerability Disclosure en Español Site Map Archive NCCIH Home National Institutes of Health U.S. Department of Health & Human Services USA.gov 9000 Rockville Pike Bethesda, Maryland 20892 NIH...Turning Discovery Into Health ® Site Last Updated: 