 Soy: Usefulness and Safety | NCCIH Skip to main content Link to External Link Policy An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know NIH Websites Are Changing NIH is moving the launch of its new website to the fall to ensure the best possible experience for everyone who relies on our websites for health information, research, funding opportunities, and other resources. Get the Latest Updates and FAQs . U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Información en Español National Center for Complementary and Integrative Health Health Info Health Info Home Topics A-Z What Is Complementary, Alternative, or Integrative Health? Pain Herbs at a Glance Know the Science Safety Information Resources for Health Care Professionals Tips on Complementary Health Statistics on Use Research Research Home Research Results by Date NCCIH Research Blog Division of Extramural Research Sponsored by NCCIH Division of Intramural Research Conducted at NCCIH Resources for Researchers Clinical Trials NIH Pain Research Center Grants & Funding Grants & Funding Home Overview: What NCCIH Funds Funding Opportunities Clinical Trial Funding Grant Policies & Guidance Application Resources Program Directors Clinical Research Toolbox Types of Grants and Contracts Small Business Research Grant Program (SBIR) General Award Mechanisms Training Training Home About Research Training and Career Development Awards & Opportunities Institutional Training Sites Training Grant Application, Review, and Award Process More Training Resources CME/CEU and Online Lectures Online Continuing Education Series Distinguished Lecture Series Integrative Medicine Research Lecture Series News & Events News & Events Home Press Releases Alerts & Advisories Events Videos NCCIH Clinical Digest About NCCIH About NCCIH Home Organizational Structure Advisory Council Partnerships Director’s Page Strategic Plans & Reports Budget & Legislation Job Opportunities Get Involved Maps & Directions National Center for Complementary and Integrative Health Search Menu Search Search Health Info Health Info Home Topics A-Z What Is Complementary, Alternative, or Integrative Health? Pain Herbs at a Glance Know the Science Safety Information Resources for Health Care Professionals Tips on Complementary Health Statistics on Use Research Research Home Research Results by Date NCCIH Research Blog Division of Extramural Research Sponsored by NCCIH Division of Intramural Research Conducted at NCCIH Resources for Researchers Clinical Trials NIH Pain Research Center Grants & Funding Grants & Funding Home Overview: What NCCIH Funds Funding Opportunities Clinical Trial Funding Grant Policies & Guidance Application Resources Program Directors Clinical Research Toolbox Types of Grants and Contracts Small Business Research Grant Program (SBIR) General Award Mechanisms Training Training Home About Research Training and Career Development Awards & Opportunities Institutional Training Sites Training Grant Application, Review, and Award Process More Training Resources CME/CEU and Online Lectures Online Continuing Education Series Distinguished Lecture Series Integrative Medicine Research Lecture Series News & Events News & Events Home Press Releases Alerts & Advisories Events Videos NCCIH Clinical Digest About NCCIH About NCCIH Home Organizational Structure Advisory Council Partnerships Director’s Page Strategic Plans & Reports Budget & Legislation Job Opportunities Get Involved Maps & Directions Home Health Information Soy Soy © Steven Foster Common Names: soy Latin Names: Glycine max Background This fact sheet focuses on the use of soy by adults for health purposes. Soybeans have long been cultivated in Asia. Currently, they are also produced in other parts of the world, including the United States. Common soy foods include tofu, miso, tempeh, edamame, and soy milk. In addition to its food uses, soy is available in dietary supplements. Soy supplements may contain soy protein, isoflavones (compounds similar in structure to the hormone estrogen), or other components. Soy products are promoted for high cholesterol, high blood pressure, diabetes, symptoms of menopause, and many other health conditions. How Much Do We Know? Many studies have been conducted on the safety and usefulness of soy products. We know enough to conclude that there are potential beneficial effects on blood cholesterol levels, menopausal hot flashes, breast cancer risk, bone density, and blood pressure. However, effects may vary for different types of soy products and in different populations. What Have We Learned? Consuming soy protein in place of other proteins may lower cholesterol levels to a small extent. Soy isoflavones may not have the same effect. Soy isoflavone supplements or soy protein may help to reduce the frequency and severity of menopausal hot flashes, but the effect may be small, and research results have not been completely consistent. Observational studies indicate that among Asian and Asian-American women, higher dietary intakes of soy are associated with a lower risk of breast cancer. The amounts of soy in Western diets, even among the highest consumers of soy, may be too low for this association to be observed. Soy products in supplement form have not been shown to reduce breast cancer risk. Soy isoflavones probably have a beneficial effect on bone density in postmenopausal women. Consumption of soy isoflavones may lead to a modest decrease in blood pressure. People who consume diets high in soy may have a lower risk of type 2 diabetes. It’s uncertain whether soy products improve control of blood sugar in people who already have type 2 diabetes. It’s uncertain whether soy has beneficial effects on cognitive function; studies have had conflicting results. What Do We Know About Safety? Some people are allergic to soy. In the United States, the presence of soy in packaged foods and dietary supplements must be indicated on the product label. In research studies, soy protein supplements have been safely used for up to 16 weeks, and soy extracts containing concentrated isoflavones have been used safely for up to 6 months. Side effects of soy may include bloating, constipation, diarrhea, and nausea. Interactions between certain soy products containing high amounts of tyramine (such as tofu and soy sauce), and monoamine oxidase inhibitors (a group of antidepressant drugs) have been reported (i.e., dangerously high blood pressure). If you take any type of medicine, talk with your health care provider before using soy or other herbal products; some herbs and medicines interact in harmful ways. The use of soy during pregnancy may be unsafe in amounts greater than those commonly found in foods. Little is known about whether it is safe to use soy in amounts greater than those commonly found in foods while breastfeeding. Keep in Mind Take charge of your health—talk with your health care providers about any complementary health approaches you use. Together, you can make shared, well-informed decisions. Federal Regulation of Herbal Products Depending on what’s in them, how they’re intended to be used, and how they’re administered (orally or topically), herbal products are regulated in a variety of ways. Many herbal products intended for oral use are marketed as dietary supplements. The regulatory paths for making and distributing dietary supplements are different than those for drugs. Unlike drugs, dietary supplements are not approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) before they are sold to the public. When public health concerns arise about the safety of a dietary supplement or an ingredient including an herb, the FDA can take action to protect the public. Manufacturers and distributors of supplements are responsible for evaluating the safety and labeling of their products before marketing to ensure that they meet all regulatory requirements. For More Information Using Dietary Supplements Wisely Know the Science: How Medications and Supplements Can Interact Know the Science: How To Make Sense of a Scientific Journal Article NCCIH Clearinghouse The NCCIH Clearinghouse provides information on NCCIH and complementary and integrative health approaches, including publications and searches of Federal databases of scientific and medical literature. The Clearinghouse does not provide medical advice, treatment recommendations, or referrals to practitioners. Toll-free in the U.S.: 1-888-644-6226 Telecommunications relay service (TRS): 7-1-1 Website: https://www.nccih.nih.gov Email: info@nccih.nih.gov (link sends email) PubMed® A service of the National Library of Medicine, PubMed® contains publication information and (in most cases) brief summaries of articles from scientific and medical journals. For guidance from NCCIH on using PubMed, see How To Find Information About Complementary Health Practices on PubMed . Website: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/ Office of Dietary Supplements (ODS), National Institutes of Health (NIH) ODS seeks to strengthen knowledge and understanding of dietary supplements by evaluating scientific information, supporting research, sharing research results, and educating the public. Its resources include publications (such as Dietary Supplements: What You Need To Know ) and fact sheets on a variety of specific supplement ingredients and products (such as vitamin D and multivitamin/mineral supplements). Website: https://ods.od.nih.gov Email: ods@nih.gov (link sends email) Key References Asbaghi O, Ashtary-Larky D, Mousa A, et al. The effects of soy products on cardiovascular risk factors in patients with type 2 diabetes: a systematic review and meta-analysis of clinical trials . Advances in Nutrition. 2022;13(2):455-473. Barańska A, Błaszczuk A, Kanadys W, et al. Effects of soy protein containing of isoflavones and isoflavones extract on plasma lipid profile in postmenopausal women as a potential prevention factor in cardiovascular diseases: systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials . Nutrients. 2021;13(8):2531. Barańska A, Błaszczuk A, Polz-Dacewicz M, et al. Effects of soy isoflavones on glycemic control and lipid profile in patients with type 2 diabetes: a systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials . Nutrients. 2021;13(6):1886. Barańska A, Kanadys W, Bogdan M, et al. The role of soy isoflavones in the prevention of bone loss in postmenopausal women: a systematic review with meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials . Journal of Clinical Medicine. 2022;11(16):4676. Belobrajdic DP, James-Martin G, Jones D, et al. Soy and gastrointestinal health: a review . Nutrients. 2023;15(8):1959. Gençtürk N, Bilgiç FS, Kaban HU. The effect of soy isoflavones given to women in the climacteric period on menopausal symptoms and quality of life: systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials . Explore. 2024;20(6):103012. Lei L, Hui S, Chen Y, et al. Effect of soy isoflavone supplementation on blood pressure: a meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials . Nutrition Journal. 2024;23(1):32 (published correction appears in Nutrition Journal. 2024;23(1):53). Shin S, Fu J, Shin W-K et al. Association of food groups and dietary pattern with breast cancer risk: a systematic review and meta-analysis . Clinical Nutrition. 2023;42(3):282-297. Soy. NatMed Pro website. Accessed at naturalmedicines.therapeuticresearch.comon November 11, 2024. [Database subscription]. Szczerba E, Koch M, Schlesinger S. Soy consumption, cognitive function, and dementia . Current Opinion in Lipidology. 2022;33(1):68-75. Yang S, Zeng Q, Huang X, et al. Effect of isoflavones on blood lipid alterations in postmenopausal females: a systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized trials . Advances in Nutrition. 2023;14(6):1633-1643. Zuo X, Zhao R, Wu M, et al. Soy consumption and risk of type 2 diabetes and cardiovascular diseases: a systematic review and meta-analysis . Nutrients. 2023;15(6):1358. This publication is not copyrighted and is in the public domain. Duplication is encouraged. NCCIH has provided this material for your information. It is not intended to substitute for the medical expertise and advice of your health care provider(s). We encourage you to discuss any decisions about treatment or care with your health care provider. The mention of any product, service, or therapy is not an endorsement by NCCIH. Last Updated: April 2025 Share Email Facebook X © Steven Foster Related Topics Herbs at a Glance HerbList App For Health Care Providers Menopausal Symptoms and Complementary Health Approaches Soy - Systematic Reviews/Reviews/Meta-analyses (PubMed®) Soy - Randomized Controlled Trials (PubMed®) Related Fact Sheets Cholesterol Management at a Glance Menopausal Symptoms: In Depth Follow NIH: Contact Us X X Facebook Facebook LinkedIn LinkedIn YouTube YouTube Follow NCCIH: Subscribe to our email update Email Updates NCCIH Home National Institutes of Health U.S. Department of Health & Human Services USA.gov 9000 Rockville Pike Bethesda, Maryland 20892 Privacy and Policies Accessibility FOIA Vulnerability Disclosure en Español Site Map NCCIH Website Archive NIH...Turning Discovery Into Health ® Site Last Updated: September 29, 2026 Follow NIH: X X Facebook Facebook LinkedIn LinkedIn YouTube YouTube Follow NCCIH: Subscribe to our email update Email Updates Contact Us Privacy and Policies Accessibility FOIA Vulnerability Disclosure en Español Site Map Archive NCCIH Home National Institutes of Health U.S. Department of Health & Human Services USA.gov 9000 Rockville Pike Bethesda, Maryland 20892 NIH...Turning Discovery Into Health ® Site Last Updated: 