 Ashwagandha: Usefulness and Safety | NCCIH Skip to main content Link to External Link Policy An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know NIH Websites Are Changing NIH is moving the launch of its new website to the fall to ensure the best possible experience for everyone who relies on our websites for health information, research, funding opportunities, and other resources. Get the Latest Updates and FAQs . U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Información en Español National Center for Complementary and Integrative Health Health Info Health Info Home Topics A-Z What Is Complementary, Alternative, or Integrative Health? Pain Herbs at a Glance Know the Science Safety Information Resources for Health Care Professionals Tips on Complementary Health Statistics on Use Research Research Home Research Results by Date NCCIH Research Blog Division of Extramural Research Sponsored by NCCIH Division of Intramural Research Conducted at NCCIH Resources for Researchers Clinical Trials NIH Pain Research Center Grants & Funding Grants & Funding Home Overview: What NCCIH Funds Funding Opportunities Clinical Trial Funding Grant Policies & Guidance Application Resources Program Directors Clinical Research Toolbox Types of Grants and Contracts Small Business Research Grant Program (SBIR) General Award Mechanisms Training Training Home About Research Training and Career Development Awards & Opportunities Institutional Training Sites Training Grant Application, Review, and Award Process More Training Resources CME/CEU and Online Lectures Online Continuing Education Series Distinguished Lecture Series Integrative Medicine Research Lecture Series News & Events News & Events Home Press Releases Alerts & Advisories Events Videos NCCIH Clinical Digest About NCCIH About NCCIH Home Organizational Structure Advisory Council Partnerships Director’s Page Strategic Plans & Reports Budget & Legislation Job Opportunities Get Involved Maps & Directions National Center for Complementary and Integrative Health Search Menu Search Search Health Info Health Info Home Topics A-Z What Is Complementary, Alternative, or Integrative Health? Pain Herbs at a Glance Know the Science Safety Information Resources for Health Care Professionals Tips on Complementary Health Statistics on Use Research Research Home Research Results by Date NCCIH Research Blog Division of Extramural Research Sponsored by NCCIH Division of Intramural Research Conducted at NCCIH Resources for Researchers Clinical Trials NIH Pain Research Center Grants & Funding Grants & Funding Home Overview: What NCCIH Funds Funding Opportunities Clinical Trial Funding Grant Policies & Guidance Application Resources Program Directors Clinical Research Toolbox Types of Grants and Contracts Small Business Research Grant Program (SBIR) General Award Mechanisms Training Training Home About Research Training and Career Development Awards & Opportunities Institutional Training Sites Training Grant Application, Review, and Award Process More Training Resources CME/CEU and Online Lectures Online Continuing Education Series Distinguished Lecture Series Integrative Medicine Research Lecture Series News & Events News & Events Home Press Releases Alerts & Advisories Events Videos NCCIH Clinical Digest About NCCIH About NCCIH Home Organizational Structure Advisory Council Partnerships Director’s Page Strategic Plans & Reports Budget & Legislation Job Opportunities Get Involved Maps & Directions Home Health Information Ashwagandha Ashwagandha Photo credit: Oregon's Wild Harvest Common Names: ashwagandha, Indian ginseng Latin Names: Withania somnifera Background Ashwagandha is an evergreen shrub found in parts of India, Africa, and the Middle East. It contains several bioactive compounds, including a group of substances known as withanolides. Withanolides have been associated with anti-inflammatory and antioxidant effects. Ashwagandha has been in use as a medicinal plant for thousands of years, especially in traditional Ayurvedic medicine. Currently, ashwagandha supplements are often promoted for stress and anxiety, sleep, male infertility, and athletic performance. These supplements typically contain ashwagandha root, leaf, or root/leaf extracts. Ashwagandha has also been promoted for COVID-19, but there is not sufficient high-quality evidence to support its use. How Much Do We Know? Many clinical trials (studies in people) have looked at the use of ashwagandha for a variety of health conditions. However, many of the studies have had small sample sizes and have used a variety of ashwagandha preparations. What Have We Learned? Research shows that some ashwagandha preparations may be effective for insomnia and stress. However, evidence is unclear about its effects on anxiety. There is some limited evidence that suggests that taking ashwagandha for 2 to 4 months may increase testosterone levels and sperm quality. There isn’t enough evidence to determine if ashwagandha is helpful for any other health conditions, such as asthma, athletic performance, cognitive function, diabetes, menopause, and female infertility. There is not enough high-quality evidence suggesting that ashwagandha is helpful in treating COVID-19. What Do We Know About Safety? Ashwagandha may be safe when taken in the short term (up to 3 months). There is not enough information to allow conclusions about its long-term safety to be reached. In some individuals, ashwagandha preparations may cause drowsiness, stomach upset, diarrhea, and vomiting. Although it is rare, there have been a number of cases that link liver injury to ashwagandha supplements. Ashwagandha should be avoided during pregnancy and should not be used while breastfeeding. Ashwagandha is not recommended for people who are about to have surgery, or for those who have autoimmune or thyroid disorders. There is evidence that ashwagandha might interact with some medications, including those for diabetes and high blood pressure, medicines that decrease the immune system response (immunosuppressants), sedatives, anti-seizure medications (anticonvulsants), and thyroid hormone medications. Because ashwagandha may increase testosterone levels, people with hormone-sensitive prostate cancer should avoid its use. Keep In Mind Take charge of your health—talk with your health care providers about any complementary health approaches you use. Together, you can make shared, well-informed decisions. Federal Regulation of Herbal Products Depending on what’s in them, how they’re intended to be used, and how they’re administered (orally or topically), herbal products are regulated in a variety of ways. Many herbal products intended for oral use are marketed as dietary supplements. The rules for making and distributing dietary supplements are less strict than those for drugs. Unlike drugs, dietary supplements are not approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) before they are sold to the public. When public health concerns arise about the safety of a dietary supplement or an ingredient including an herb, the FDA can take action to protect the public. Manufacturers and distributors of supplements are responsible for evaluating the safety and labeling of their products before marketing to ensure that they meet all regulatory requirements. For More Information Using Dietary Supplements Wisely Know the Science: How Medications and Supplements Can Interact Know the Science: How To Make Sense of a Scientific Journal Article NCCIH Clearinghouse The NCCIH Clearinghouse provides information on NCCIH and complementary and integrative health approaches, including publications and searches of Federal databases of scientific and medical literature. The Clearinghouse does not provide medical advice, treatment recommendations, or referrals to practitioners. Toll-free in the U.S.: 1-888-644-6226 Telecommunications relay service (TRS): 7-1-1 Website: https://www.nccih.nih.gov Email: info@nccih.nih.gov (link sends email) PubMed® A service of the National Library of Medicine, PubMed® contains publication information and (in most cases) brief summaries of articles from scientific and medical journals. For guidance from NCCIH on using PubMed, see How To Find Information About Complementary Health Practices on PubMed . Website: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/ Office of Dietary Supplements (ODS), National Institutes of Health (NIH) ODS seeks to strengthen knowledge and understanding of dietary supplements by evaluating scientific information, supporting research, sharing research results, and educating the public. Its resources include publications (such as Dietary Supplements: What You Need To Know ) and fact sheets on a variety of specific supplement ingredients and products (such as vitamin D and multivitamin/mineral supplements). Website: https://ods.od.nih.gov Email: ods@nih.gov (link sends email) Key References Ashwagandha. LiverTox: Clinical and research information on drug-induced liver injury. Bethesda, MD: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases; 2019. Accessed at ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK548536 on July 6, 2022. Ashwagandha. Natural Medicines website. Accessed at naturalmedicines.therapeuticresearch.com on July 6, 2022. [Database subscription]. Cheah KL, Norhayati MN, Husniati Yaacob L, et al. Effect of ashwagandha (Withania somnifera) extract on sleep: a systematic review and meta-analysis . PLoS One. 2021;16(9):e0257843. Durg S, Shivarum SB, Bavage S. Withania somnifera (Indian ginseng) in male infertility: an evidence-based systematic review and meta-analysis . Phytomedicine . 2018;50:247-256. Mukherjee PK, Banerjee S, Biswas S, et al. Withania somnifera (L.) Dunal - Modern perspectives of an ancient Rasayana from Ayurveda . Journal of Ethnopharmacology . 2021;264:113157. Nasimi Doost Azgomi R, Zomorrodi A, Nazemyieh H, et al. Effects of Withania somnifera on reproductive system: a systematic review of the available evidence . BioMed Research International. 2018;2018:4076430 ( published correction appears in BioMed Research International. 2019;2019:7591541). Savage K, Firth J, Stough C, et al. GABA-modulating phytomedicines for anxiety: a systematic review of preclinical and clinical evidence . Phytotherapy Research . 2018;32(1):3-18. Shukla SD, Bhatnagar M, Khurana S. Critical evaluation of Ayurvedic plants for stimulating intrinsic antioxidant response . Frontiers in Neuroscience. 2012;6:112. Smith SJ, Lopresti AL, Teo SYM, et al. Examining the effects of herbs on testosterone concentrations in men: a systematic review . Advances in Nutrition. 2021;12(3):744-765. Speers AB, Cabey KA, Soumyanath A, et al. Effects of Withania somnifera (ashwagandha) on stress and the stress-related neuropsychiatric disorders anxiety, depression, and insomnia . Current Neuropharmacology. 2021;19(9):1468-1495. Tandon N, Yadav SS. Safety and clinical effectiveness of Withania somnifera (Linn.) Dunal root in human ailments . Journal of Ethnopharmacology . 2020;255:112768. White PT, Subramanian C, Motiwala HF, et al. Natural withanolides in the treatment of chronic diseases . Advances in Experimental Medicine and Biology . 2016;928:329-373. This publication is not copyrighted and is in the public domain. Duplication is encouraged. NCCIH has provided this material for your information. It is not intended to substitute for the medical expertise and advice of your health care provider(s). We encourage you to discuss any decisions about treatment or care with your health care provider. The mention of any product, service, or therapy is not an endorsement by NCCIH. Last Updated: March 2023 Share Email Facebook X Photo credit: Oregon's Wild Harvest Related Topics Herbs at a Glance HerbList App Related Fact Sheets Stress Follow NIH: Contact Us X X Facebook Facebook LinkedIn LinkedIn YouTube YouTube Follow NCCIH: Subscribe to our email update Email Updates NCCIH Home National Institutes of Health U.S. Department of Health & Human Services USA.gov 9000 Rockville Pike Bethesda, Maryland 20892 Privacy and Policies Accessibility FOIA Vulnerability Disclosure en Español Site Map NCCIH Website Archive NIH...Turning Discovery Into Health ® Site Last Updated: September 29, 2026 Follow NIH: X X Facebook Facebook LinkedIn LinkedIn YouTube YouTube Follow NCCIH: Subscribe to our email update Email Updates Contact Us Privacy and Policies Accessibility FOIA Vulnerability Disclosure en Español Site Map Archive NCCIH Home National Institutes of Health U.S. Department of Health & Human Services USA.gov 9000 Rockville Pike Bethesda, Maryland 20892 NIH...Turning Discovery Into Health ® Site Last Updated: 