 Kava: Usefulness and Safety | NCCIH Skip to main content Link to External Link Policy An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know NIH Websites Are Changing NIH is moving the launch of its new website to the fall to ensure the best possible experience for everyone who relies on our websites for health information, research, funding opportunities, and other resources. Get the Latest Updates and FAQs . U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Información en Español National Center for Complementary and Integrative Health Health Info Health Info Home Topics A-Z What Is Complementary, Alternative, or Integrative Health? Pain Herbs at a Glance Know the Science Safety Information Resources for Health Care Professionals Tips on Complementary Health Statistics on Use Research Research Home Research Results by Date NCCIH Research Blog Division of Extramural Research Sponsored by NCCIH Division of Intramural Research Conducted at NCCIH Resources for Researchers Clinical Trials NIH Pain Research Center Grants & Funding Grants & Funding Home Overview: What NCCIH Funds Funding Opportunities Clinical Trial Funding Grant Policies & Guidance Application Resources Program Directors Clinical Research Toolbox Types of Grants and Contracts Small Business Research Grant Program (SBIR) General Award Mechanisms Training Training Home About Research Training and Career Development Awards & Opportunities Institutional Training Sites Training Grant Application, Review, and Award Process More Training Resources CME/CEU and Online Lectures Online Continuing Education Series Distinguished Lecture Series Integrative Medicine Research Lecture Series News & Events News & Events Home Press Releases Alerts & Advisories Events Videos NCCIH Clinical Digest About NCCIH About NCCIH Home Organizational Structure Advisory Council Partnerships Director’s Page Strategic Plans & Reports Budget & Legislation Job Opportunities Get Involved Maps & Directions National Center for Complementary and Integrative Health Search Menu Search Search Health Info Health Info Home Topics A-Z What Is Complementary, Alternative, or Integrative Health? Pain Herbs at a Glance Know the Science Safety Information Resources for Health Care Professionals Tips on Complementary Health Statistics on Use Research Research Home Research Results by Date NCCIH Research Blog Division of Extramural Research Sponsored by NCCIH Division of Intramural Research Conducted at NCCIH Resources for Researchers Clinical Trials NIH Pain Research Center Grants & Funding Grants & Funding Home Overview: What NCCIH Funds Funding Opportunities Clinical Trial Funding Grant Policies & Guidance Application Resources Program Directors Clinical Research Toolbox Types of Grants and Contracts Small Business Research Grant Program (SBIR) General Award Mechanisms Training Training Home About Research Training and Career Development Awards & Opportunities Institutional Training Sites Training Grant Application, Review, and Award Process More Training Resources CME/CEU and Online Lectures Online Continuing Education Series Distinguished Lecture Series Integrative Medicine Research Lecture Series News & Events News & Events Home Press Releases Alerts & Advisories Events Videos NCCIH Clinical Digest About NCCIH About NCCIH Home Organizational Structure Advisory Council Partnerships Director’s Page Strategic Plans & Reports Budget & Legislation Job Opportunities Get Involved Maps & Directions Home Health Information Kava Kava © Steven Foster Common Names: kava, kava kava, awa, ava pepper, ava root, kawa Latin Names: Piper methysticum Background Kava is native to the South Pacific and is a member of the pepper family. Pacific Islanders have used kava beverages for thousands of years for ceremonial and medicinal purposes. More recently, the use of kava as a beverage has grown both in the Pacific Islands and in other parts of the world. Kava drinks are now sold at kava bars at many locations in the United States. Kava products are sold in the United States as dietary supplements and in some other countries as drugs or herbal medicines. These products are promoted for anxiety and other health conditions. How Much Do We Know? There has been a fair amount of research in people on the use of kava for anxiety, but few studies have been done on other conditions. There has also been substantial investigation of rare but sometimes severe cases of liver injury associated with the use of kava. What Have We Learned? Kava supplements may be helpful for anxiety, but they may need to be taken for several weeks to produce an effect. Kava does not appear to be helpful for symptoms of generalized anxiety disorder. There isn’t enough evidence to show whether kava is helpful for any other conditions. What Do We Know About Safety? Various kava products have been linked to rare cases of liver injury, some of which have been serious or even fatal. The first reported cases involved medicinal or dietary supplement products that had been extracted with alcohol or acetone, but other cases have involved kava beverages prepared with water. It has been suggested that the use of undesirable varieties (cultivars) of kava plants or inappropriate parts of the plant may be responsible for liver toxicity; other possibilities include the consumption of kava together with alcohol and the adulteration or contamination of kava products. It has also been suggested that genetic differences among people might influence their susceptibility to liver toxicity and that consumption of kava in large amounts or for prolonged periods of time may increase risk. Kava can cause digestive upset, headache, dizziness, and other side effects. Long-term use of high doses of kava may cause kava dermopathy, a condition that involves dry, scaly, flaky skin with reddened eyes and temporary yellow discoloration of the skin, hair, and nails. Kava should not be used together with other substances that have sedative effects, such as benzodiazepines or alcohol. If you take any type of medicine, talk with your health care provider before using kava or other herbal products; some herbs and medicines interact in harmful ways. Kava may have special risks if taken during pregnancy or while breastfeeding because of the presence of harmful pyrone constituents. Keep in Mind Take charge of your health—talk with your health care providers about any complementary health approaches you use. Together, you can make shared, well-informed decisions. Federal Regulation of Herbal Products Depending on what’s in them, how they’re intended to be used, and how they’re administered (orally or topically), herbal products are regulated in a variety of ways. Many herbal products intended for oral use are marketed as dietary supplements. The regulatory paths for making and distributing dietary supplements are different than those for drugs. Unlike drugs, dietary supplements are not approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) before they are sold to the public. When public health concerns arise about the safety of a dietary supplement or an ingredient including an herb, the FDA can take action to protect the public. Manufacturers and distributors of supplements are responsible for evaluating the safety and labeling of their products before marketing to ensure that they meet all regulatory requirements. For More Information Using Dietary Supplements Wisely Know the Science: How Medications and Supplements Can Interact Know the Science: How To Make Sense of a Scientific Journal Article NCCIH Clearinghouse The NCCIH Clearinghouse provides information on NCCIH and complementary and integrative health approaches, including publications and searches of Federal databases of scientific and medical literature. The Clearinghouse does not provide medical advice, treatment recommendations, or referrals to practitioners. Toll-free in the U.S.: 1-888-644-6226 Telecommunications relay service (TRS): 7-1-1 Website: https://www.nccih.nih.gov Email: info@nccih.nih.gov (link sends email) PubMed® A service of the National Library of Medicine, PubMed® contains publication information and (in most cases) brief summaries of articles from scientific and medical journals. For guidance from NCCIH on using PubMed, see How To Find Information About Complementary Health Practices on PubMed . Website: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/ Office of Dietary Supplements (ODS), National Institutes of Health (NIH) ODS seeks to strengthen knowledge and understanding of dietary supplements by evaluating scientific information, supporting research, sharing research results, and educating the public. Its resources include publications (such as Dietary Supplements: What You Need To Know ) and fact sheets on a variety of specific supplement ingredients and products (such as vitamin D and multivitamin/mineral supplements). Website: https://ods.od.nih.gov Email: ods@nih.gov (link sends email) Key References Ballotin VR, Bigarella LG, Brandão ABM, et al. Herb-induced liver injury: systematic review and meta-analysis . World Journal of Clinical Cases. 2021;9(20):5490-5513. Bian T, Corral P, Wang Y, et al. Kava as a clinical nutrient: promises and challenges . Nutrients. 2020;12(10):3044. Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations/World Health Organization. Kava: a review of the safety of traditional and recreational beverage consumption. Technical report. 2016. Accessed at openknowledge.fao.org/items/ddb51a21-1451-4b4f-9c29-eaab9af1131b on May 31, 2024. Kava kava. LiverTox: Clinical and Research Information on Drug-Induced Liver Injury [Internet]. National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases. Updated April 10, 2018. Accessed at ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK548637 on May 30, 2024. Kava. NatMed Pro website. Accessed at naturalmedicines.therapeuticresearch.com on April 24, 2024. [Database subscription]. Kuchta K, Schmidt M, Nahrstedt A. German kava ban lifted by court: the alleged hepatotoxicity of kava (Piper methysticum) as a case of ill-defined herbal drug identity, lacking quality control, and misguided regulatory politics . Planta Medica. 2015;81(18):1647-1653. Mamallapalli J, Kanumuri SRR, Corral P, et al. Characterization of different forms of kava (Piper methysticum) products by UPLC-MS/MS . Planta Medica. 2022;88(14):1348-1349. Sarris J, Byrne GJ, Bousman CA, et al. Kava for generalised anxiety disorder: a 16-week double-blind, randomised, placebo-controlled study . Australian & New Zealand Journal of Psychiatry. 2020;54(3):288-297. Soares RB, Dinis-Oliveira RJ, Oliveira NG. An updated review on the psychoactive, toxic and anticancer properties of kava . Journal of Clinical Medicine. 2022;11(14):4039. Teschke R, Schulze J. Risk of kava hepatotoxicity and the FDA consumer advisory . JAMA. 2010;304(19):2174-2175. Teschke R, Sarris J, Schweitzer I. Kava hepatotoxicity in traditional and modern use: the presumed Pacific kava paradox hypothesis revisited . British Journal of Clinical Pharmacology. 2012;73(2):170-174. U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Memorandum. Review of the published literature pertaining to the safety of kava for use in conventional foods. August 11, 2020. Accessed at www.fda.gov/media/169556/download on May 31, 2024. Verma K, Singh D, Srivastava A. The impact of complementary and alternative medicine in insomnia: a systematic review . Cureus. 2022;14(8):e28425. White CM. The pharmacology, pharmacokinetics, efficacy, and adverse events associated with kava . Journal of Clinical Pharmacology. 2018;58(11):1396-1405. This publication is not copyrighted and is in the public domain. Duplication is encouraged. NCCIH has provided this material for your information. It is not intended to substitute for the medical expertise and advice of your health care provider(s). We encourage you to discuss any decisions about treatment or care with your health care provider. The mention of any product, service, or therapy is not an endorsement by NCCIH. Last Updated: April 2025 Share Email Facebook X © Steven Foster Related Topics Herbs at a Glance HerbList App For Health Care Providers Anxiety and Complementary Health Approaches Related Fact Sheets Anxiety and Complementary Health Approaches Sleep Disorders and Complementary Health Approaches Follow NIH: Contact Us X X Facebook Facebook LinkedIn LinkedIn YouTube YouTube Follow NCCIH: Subscribe to our email update Email Updates NCCIH Home National Institutes of Health U.S. Department of Health & Human Services USA.gov 9000 Rockville Pike Bethesda, Maryland 20892 Privacy and Policies Accessibility FOIA Vulnerability Disclosure en Español Site Map NCCIH Website Archive NIH...Turning Discovery Into Health ® Site Last Updated: September 29, 2026 Follow NIH: X X Facebook Facebook LinkedIn LinkedIn YouTube YouTube Follow NCCIH: Subscribe to our email update Email Updates Contact Us Privacy and Policies Accessibility FOIA Vulnerability Disclosure en Español Site Map Archive NCCIH Home National Institutes of Health U.S. Department of Health & Human Services USA.gov 9000 Rockville Pike Bethesda, Maryland 20892 NIH...Turning Discovery Into Health ® Site Last Updated: 