 Hoodia: Usefulness and Safety | NCCIH Skip to main content Link to External Link Policy An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know NIH Websites Are Changing NIH is moving the launch of its new website to the fall to ensure the best possible experience for everyone who relies on our websites for health information, research, funding opportunities, and other resources. Get the Latest Updates and FAQs . U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Información en Español National Center for Complementary and Integrative Health Health Info Health Info Home Topics A-Z What Is Complementary, Alternative, or Integrative Health? Pain Herbs at a Glance Know the Science Safety Information Resources for Health Care Professionals Tips on Complementary Health Statistics on Use Research Research Home Research Results by Date NCCIH Research Blog Division of Extramural Research Sponsored by NCCIH Division of Intramural Research Conducted at NCCIH Resources for Researchers Clinical Trials NIH Pain Research Center Grants & Funding Grants & Funding Home Overview: What NCCIH Funds Funding Opportunities Clinical Trial Funding Grant Policies & Guidance Application Resources Program Directors Clinical Research Toolbox Types of Grants and Contracts Small Business Research Grant Program (SBIR) General Award Mechanisms Training Training Home About Research Training and Career Development Awards & Opportunities Institutional Training Sites Training Grant Application, Review, and Award Process More Training Resources CME/CEU and Online Lectures Online Continuing Education Series Distinguished Lecture Series Integrative Medicine Research Lecture Series News & Events News & Events Home Press Releases Alerts & Advisories Events Videos NCCIH Clinical Digest About NCCIH About NCCIH Home Organizational Structure Advisory Council Partnerships Director’s Page Strategic Plans & Reports Budget & Legislation Job Opportunities Get Involved Maps & Directions National Center for Complementary and Integrative Health Search Menu Search Search Health Info Health Info Home Topics A-Z What Is Complementary, Alternative, or Integrative Health? Pain Herbs at a Glance Know the Science Safety Information Resources for Health Care Professionals Tips on Complementary Health Statistics on Use Research Research Home Research Results by Date NCCIH Research Blog Division of Extramural Research Sponsored by NCCIH Division of Intramural Research Conducted at NCCIH Resources for Researchers Clinical Trials NIH Pain Research Center Grants & Funding Grants & Funding Home Overview: What NCCIH Funds Funding Opportunities Clinical Trial Funding Grant Policies & Guidance Application Resources Program Directors Clinical Research Toolbox Types of Grants and Contracts Small Business Research Grant Program (SBIR) General Award Mechanisms Training Training Home About Research Training and Career Development Awards & Opportunities Institutional Training Sites Training Grant Application, Review, and Award Process More Training Resources CME/CEU and Online Lectures Online Continuing Education Series Distinguished Lecture Series Integrative Medicine Research Lecture Series News & Events News & Events Home Press Releases Alerts & Advisories Events Videos NCCIH Clinical Digest About NCCIH About NCCIH Home Organizational Structure Advisory Council Partnerships Director’s Page Strategic Plans & Reports Budget & Legislation Job Opportunities Get Involved Maps & Directions Home Health Information Hoodia Hoodia © Steven Foster Common Names: hoodia, Kalahari cactus, Xhoba, Bushman's hat Latin Names: Hoodia gordonii Background Hoodia is a leafless succulent that grows in Africa’s Kalahari Desert, including parts of Namibia, Botswana, and South Africa. Traditionally, the indigenous San peoples have used hoodia to suppress appetite during long hunts. It’s thought that an oxypregnane steroidal glycoside molecule found in hoodia, known as P57, could have an appetite-reducing effect. Today, hoodia supplements are promoted for appetite suppression and weight loss. How Much Do We Know? We know very little about hoodia. Only one small study has been done on the effects of hoodia supplements in people. What Have We Learned? The one small study of hoodia involved 49 women who were overweight. Those who took hoodia for 15 days didn’t lose more weight than those who took a placebo. What Do We Know About Safety? Little is known about the safety of hoodia, but the one small study in people raised concerns. In that study, participants taking hoodia had more adverse effects, including nausea, vomiting, dizziness, and odd skin sensations, than those taking placebos. The researchers saw clinical and safety concerns for hoodia related to blood pressure and heart measures. Little is known about whether it’s safe to use hoodia during pregnancy or while breastfeeding. Keep in Mind Take charge of your health—talk with your health care providers about any complementary health approaches you use. Together, you can make shared, well-informed decisions. If you take any type of medicine, talk with your health care provider before using any herbal product; some herbs and medications interact in harmful ways. Federal Regulation of Herbal Products Depending on what’s in them, how they’re intended to be used, and how they’re administered (orally or topically), herbal products are regulated in a variety of ways. Many herbal products intended for oral use are marketed as dietary supplements. The regulatory paths for making and distributing dietary supplements are different than those for drugs. Unlike drugs, dietary supplements are not approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) before they are sold to the public. When public health concerns arise about the safety of a dietary supplement or an ingredient including an herb, the FDA can take action to protect the public. Manufacturers and distributors of supplements are responsible for evaluating the safety and labeling of their products before marketing to ensure that they meet all regulatory requirements. For More Information Using Dietary Supplements Wisely Know the Science: How Medications and Supplements Can Interact Know the Science: How To Make Sense of a Scientific Journal Article NCCIH Clearinghouse The NCCIH Clearinghouse provides information on NCCIH and complementary and integrative health approaches, including publications and searches of Federal databases of scientific and medical literature. The Clearinghouse does not provide medical advice, treatment recommendations, or referrals to practitioners. Toll-free in the U.S.: 1-888-644-6226 Telecommunications relay service (TRS): 7-1-1 Website: https://www.nccih.nih.gov Email: info@nccih.nih.gov (link sends email) PubMed® A service of the National Library of Medicine, PubMed® contains publication information and (in most cases) brief summaries of articles from scientific and medical journals. For guidance from NCCIH on using PubMed, see How To Find Information About Complementary Health Practices on PubMed . Website: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/ Office of Dietary Supplements (ODS), National Institutes of Health (NIH) ODS seeks to strengthen knowledge and understanding of dietary supplements by evaluating scientific information, supporting research, sharing research results, and educating the public. Its resources include publications (such as Dietary Supplements: What You Need To Know ) and fact sheets on a variety of specific supplement ingredients and products (such as vitamin D and multivitamin/mineral supplements). Website: https://ods.od.nih.gov Email: ods@nih.gov (link sends email) Key References Blom WAM, Abrahamse SL, Bradford R, et al. Effects of 15-d repeated consumption of Hoodia gordonii purified extract on safety, ad libitum energy intake, and body weight in healthy, overweight women: a randomized controlled trial . American Journal of Clinical Nutrition. 2011;94(5):1171-1181. Bonetti G, Herbst KL, Donato K, et al. Dietary supplements for obesity . Journal of Preventive Medicine and Hygiene. 2022;63(3):E160-E168. Farrington R, Musgrave IF, Byard RW. Evidence for the efficacy and safety of herbal weight loss preparations . Journal of Integrative Medicine. 2019;17(2):87-92. Hoodia. LiverTox: Clinical and Research Information on Drug-Induced Liver Injury [Internet]. National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases. Updated March 28, 2018. Accessed at ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK548704/ on May 1, 2024. Hoodia. NatMed Pro website. Accessed at naturalmedicines.therapeuticresearch.com/ on May 1, 2024. [Database subscription]. This publication is not copyrighted and is in the public domain. Duplication is encouraged. NCCIH has provided this material for your information. It is not intended to substitute for the medical expertise and advice of your health care provider(s). We encourage you to discuss any decisions about treatment or care with your health care provider. The mention of any product, service, or therapy is not an endorsement by NCCIH. Last Updated: April 2025 Share Email Facebook X © Steven Foster Related Topics Herbs at a Glance HerbList App Related Fact Sheets Using Dietary Supplements Wisely Follow NIH: Contact Us X X Facebook Facebook LinkedIn LinkedIn YouTube YouTube Follow NCCIH: Subscribe to our email update Email Updates NCCIH Home National Institutes of Health U.S. Department of Health & Human Services USA.gov 9000 Rockville Pike Bethesda, Maryland 20892 Privacy and Policies Accessibility FOIA Vulnerability Disclosure en Español Site Map NCCIH Website Archive NIH...Turning Discovery Into Health ® Site Last Updated: September 29, 2026 Follow NIH: X X Facebook Facebook LinkedIn LinkedIn YouTube YouTube Follow NCCIH: Subscribe to our email update Email Updates Contact Us Privacy and Policies Accessibility FOIA Vulnerability Disclosure en Español Site Map Archive NCCIH Home National Institutes of Health U.S. Department of Health & Human Services USA.gov 9000 Rockville Pike Bethesda, Maryland 20892 NIH...Turning Discovery Into Health ® Site Last Updated: 