 Valerian: Usefulness and Safety | NCCIH Skip to main content Link to External Link Policy An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know NIH Websites Are Changing NIH is moving the launch of its new website to the fall to ensure the best possible experience for everyone who relies on our websites for health information, research, funding opportunities, and other resources. Get the Latest Updates and FAQs . U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Información en Español National Center for Complementary and Integrative Health Health Info Health Info Home Topics A-Z What Is Complementary, Alternative, or Integrative Health? Pain Herbs at a Glance Know the Science Safety Information Resources for Health Care Professionals Tips on Complementary Health Statistics on Use Research Research Home Research Results by Date NCCIH Research Blog Division of Extramural Research Sponsored by NCCIH Division of Intramural Research Conducted at NCCIH Resources for Researchers Clinical Trials NIH Pain Research Center Grants & Funding Grants & Funding Home Overview: What NCCIH Funds Funding Opportunities Clinical Trial Funding Grant Policies & Guidance Application Resources Program Directors Clinical Research Toolbox Types of Grants and Contracts Small Business Research Grant Program (SBIR) General Award Mechanisms Training Training Home About Research Training and Career Development Awards & Opportunities Institutional Training Sites Training Grant Application, Review, and Award Process More Training Resources CME/CEU and Online Lectures Online Continuing Education Series Distinguished Lecture Series Integrative Medicine Research Lecture Series News & Events News & Events Home Press Releases Alerts & Advisories Events Videos NCCIH Clinical Digest About NCCIH About NCCIH Home Organizational Structure Advisory Council Partnerships Director’s Page Strategic Plans & Reports Budget & Legislation Job Opportunities Get Involved Maps & Directions National Center for Complementary and Integrative Health Search Menu Search Search Health Info Health Info Home Topics A-Z What Is Complementary, Alternative, or Integrative Health? Pain Herbs at a Glance Know the Science Safety Information Resources for Health Care Professionals Tips on Complementary Health Statistics on Use Research Research Home Research Results by Date NCCIH Research Blog Division of Extramural Research Sponsored by NCCIH Division of Intramural Research Conducted at NCCIH Resources for Researchers Clinical Trials NIH Pain Research Center Grants & Funding Grants & Funding Home Overview: What NCCIH Funds Funding Opportunities Clinical Trial Funding Grant Policies & Guidance Application Resources Program Directors Clinical Research Toolbox Types of Grants and Contracts Small Business Research Grant Program (SBIR) General Award Mechanisms Training Training Home About Research Training and Career Development Awards & Opportunities Institutional Training Sites Training Grant Application, Review, and Award Process More Training Resources CME/CEU and Online Lectures Online Continuing Education Series Distinguished Lecture Series Integrative Medicine Research Lecture Series News & Events News & Events Home Press Releases Alerts & Advisories Events Videos NCCIH Clinical Digest About NCCIH About NCCIH Home Organizational Structure Advisory Council Partnerships Director’s Page Strategic Plans & Reports Budget & Legislation Job Opportunities Get Involved Maps & Directions Home Health Information Valerian Valerian © Steven Foster Common Names: valerian, all-heal, garden heliotrope Latin Names: Valeriana officinalis Background Valerian is a plant native to Europe and Asia; it also grows in North America. Valerian has been used medicinally since the times of early Greece and Rome. Historically, valerian was used to treat insomnia, migraine, fatigue, and stomach cramps. Today, valerian is promoted for insomnia, anxiety, stress, and depression. The roots and rhizomes (underground stems) of valerian are used for medicinal purposes. How Much Do We Know? Knowledge about valerian is limited because a relatively small amount of research has looked at valerian’s effects on various conditions. There is not enough evidence to determine whether valerian is useful for any health conditions. What Have We Learned? The evidence on whether valerian is helpful for sleep problems is inconsistent. In its 2017 clinical practice guidelines, the American Academy of Sleep Medicine recommended against using valerian for chronic insomnia in adults. Three small studies suggest that valerian might be helpful for menopause symptoms, but there is not enough evidence to know for certain. There’s not enough evidence to allow any conclusions about whether valerian is helpful for anxiety, depression, premenstrual syndrome, dysmenorrhea (menstrual cramps), stress, or other conditions. What Do We Know About Safety? Research suggests that valerian is generally safe for short-term use by most adults. It has been used with apparent safety in doses of 300 to 600 milligrams daily for up to 6 weeks. The safety of long-term use of valerian is unknown. Side effects of valerian include headache, stomach upset, mental dullness, excitability, uneasiness, and vivid dreams. Some may experience withdrawal symptoms, including anxiety, irritability, heart disturbances, insomnia, and in rare cases, hallucinations, if stopped abruptly after chronic use. In very rare cases, liver injury was reported when taking valerian, most often in combination with other herbals; however, valerian’s long-term effect on liver function is unknown. Because it is possible (though not proven) that valerian might have a sleep-inducing effect, it should not be taken along with alcohol or sedatives. If you take any type of medicine, talk with your health care provider before using valerian or other herbal products; some herbs and medicines interact in harmful ways. Little is known about whether it’s safe to use valerian during pregnancy or while breastfeeding. Keep in Mind Take charge of your health—talk with your health care providers about any complementary health approaches you use. Together, you can make shared, well-informed decisions. Federal Regulation of Herbal Products Depending on what’s in them, how they’re intended to be used, and how they’re administered (orally or topically), herbal products are regulated in a variety of ways. Many herbal products intended for oral use are marketed as dietary supplements. The regulatory paths for making and distributing dietary supplements are different than those for drugs. Unlike drugs, dietary supplements are not approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) before they are sold to the public. When public health concerns arise about the safety of a dietary supplement or an ingredient including an herb, the FDA can take action to protect the public. Manufacturers and distributors of supplements are responsible for evaluating the safety and labeling of their products before marketing to ensure that they meet all regulatory requirements. For More Information Using Dietary Supplements Wisely Know the Science: How Medications and Supplements Can Interact Know the Science: How To Make Sense of a Scientific Journal Article NCCIH Clearinghouse The NCCIH Clearinghouse provides information on NCCIH and complementary and integrative health approaches, including publications and searches of Federal databases of scientific and medical literature. The Clearinghouse does not provide medical advice, treatment recommendations, or referrals to practitioners. Toll-free in the U.S.: 1-888-644-6226 Telecommunications relay service (TRS): 7-1-1 Website: https://www.nccih.nih.gov Email: info@nccih.nih.gov (link sends email) PubMed® A service of the National Library of Medicine, PubMed® contains publication information and (in most cases) brief summaries of articles from scientific and medical journals. For guidance from NCCIH on using PubMed, see How To Find Information About Complementary Health Practices on PubMed . Website: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/ Office of Dietary Supplements (ODS), National Institutes of Health (NIH) ODS seeks to strengthen knowledge and understanding of dietary supplements by evaluating scientific information, supporting research, sharing research results, and educating the public. Its resources include publications (such as Dietary Supplements: What You Need To Know ) and fact sheets on a variety of specific supplement ingredients and products (such as vitamin D and multivitamin/mineral supplements). Website: https://ods.od.nih.gov Email: ods@nih.gov (link sends email) Key References Abad VC, Guilleminault C. Insomnia in elderly patients: recommendations for pharmacological management . Drugs & Aging. 2018;35(9):791-817. Awang DVC. Valerian. In: Coates PM, Betz JM, Blackman MR, et al., eds. Encyclopedia of Dietary Supplements. 2nd ed. New York, NY: Informa Healthcare; 2010:766-777. Jenabi E, Shobeiri F, Hazavehei SMM, et al. The effect of valerian on the severity and frequency of hot flashes: a triple-blind randomized clinical trial . Women & Health. 2018;58(3):297-304. Leach MJ, Page AT. Herbal medicine for insomnia: a systematic review and meta-analysis . Sleep Medicine Reviews . 2015;24:1-12. Mirabi P, Mojab F. The effects of valerian root on hot flashes in menopausal women . Iranian Journal of Pharmaceutical Research. 2013;12(1):217-222. National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases. LiverTox: Clinical and Research Information on Drug-Induced Liver Injury . National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases; 2012-. [Updated April 5, 2020]. Valerian. Accessed at ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK548255 on January 29, 2025. Pattanittum P, Kunyanone N, Brown J, et al. Dietary supplements for dysmenorrhoea . Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews . 2016;(3):CD002124. Accessed at cochranelibrary.com on January 14, 2025. Sateia MJ, Buysse DJ, Krystal AD, et al. Clinical practice guideline for the pharmacological treatment of chronic insomnia in adults: an American Academy of Sleep Medicine Clinical Practice Guideline . Journal of Clinical Sleep Medicine . 2017;13(2):307-349. Valente V, Machado D, Jorge S, et al. Does valerian work for insomnia? An umbrella review of the evidence . European Neuropsychopharmacology . 2024;82:6-28. Valerian. NatMed Pro website. Accessed at naturalmedicines.therapeuticresearch.com on January 3, 2025. [Database subscription]. This publication is not copyrighted and is in the public domain. Duplication is encouraged. NCCIH has provided this material for your information. It is not intended to substitute for the medical expertise and advice of your health care provider(s). We encourage you to discuss any decisions about treatment or care with your health care provider. The mention of any product, service, or therapy is not an endorsement by NCCIH. Last Updated: May 2025 Share Email Facebook X © Steven Foster Related Topics Herbs at a Glance HerbList App Related Fact Sheets Sleep Disorders and Complementary Health Approaches Follow NIH: Contact Us X X Facebook Facebook LinkedIn LinkedIn YouTube YouTube Follow NCCIH: Subscribe to our email update Email Updates NCCIH Home National Institutes of Health U.S. Department of Health & Human Services USA.gov 9000 Rockville Pike Bethesda, Maryland 20892 Privacy and Policies Accessibility FOIA Vulnerability Disclosure en Español Site Map NCCIH Website Archive NIH...Turning Discovery Into Health ® Site Last Updated: September 29, 2026 Follow NIH: X X Facebook Facebook LinkedIn LinkedIn YouTube YouTube Follow NCCIH: Subscribe to our email update Email Updates Contact Us Privacy and Policies Accessibility FOIA Vulnerability Disclosure en Español Site Map Archive NCCIH Home National Institutes of Health U.S. Department of Health & Human Services USA.gov 9000 Rockville Pike Bethesda, Maryland 20892 NIH...Turning Discovery Into Health ® Site Last Updated: 