 Flaxseed and Flaxseed Oil: Usefulness and Safety | NCCIH Skip to main content Link to External Link Policy An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know NIH Websites Are Changing NIH is moving the launch of its new website to the fall to ensure the best possible experience for everyone who relies on our websites for health information, research, funding opportunities, and other resources. Get the Latest Updates and FAQs . U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Información en Español National Center for Complementary and Integrative Health Health Info Health Info Home Topics A-Z What Is Complementary, Alternative, or Integrative Health? Pain Herbs at a Glance Know the Science Safety Information Resources for Health Care Professionals Tips on Complementary Health Statistics on Use Research Research Home Research Results by Date NCCIH Research Blog Division of Extramural Research Sponsored by NCCIH Division of Intramural Research Conducted at NCCIH Resources for Researchers Clinical Trials NIH Pain Research Center Grants & Funding Grants & Funding Home Overview: What NCCIH Funds Funding Opportunities Clinical Trial Funding Grant Policies & Guidance Application Resources Program Directors Clinical Research Toolbox Types of Grants and Contracts Small Business Research Grant Program (SBIR) General Award Mechanisms Training Training Home About Research Training and Career Development Awards & Opportunities Institutional Training Sites Training Grant Application, Review, and Award Process More Training Resources CME/CEU and Online Lectures Online Continuing Education Series Distinguished Lecture Series Integrative Medicine Research Lecture Series News & Events News & Events Home Press Releases Alerts & Advisories Events Videos NCCIH Clinical Digest About NCCIH About NCCIH Home Organizational Structure Advisory Council Partnerships Director’s Page Strategic Plans & Reports Budget & Legislation Job Opportunities Get Involved Maps & Directions National Center for Complementary and Integrative Health Search Menu Search Search Health Info Health Info Home Topics A-Z What Is Complementary, Alternative, or Integrative Health? Pain Herbs at a Glance Know the Science Safety Information Resources for Health Care Professionals Tips on Complementary Health Statistics on Use Research Research Home Research Results by Date NCCIH Research Blog Division of Extramural Research Sponsored by NCCIH Division of Intramural Research Conducted at NCCIH Resources for Researchers Clinical Trials NIH Pain Research Center Grants & Funding Grants & Funding Home Overview: What NCCIH Funds Funding Opportunities Clinical Trial Funding Grant Policies & Guidance Application Resources Program Directors Clinical Research Toolbox Types of Grants and Contracts Small Business Research Grant Program (SBIR) General Award Mechanisms Training Training Home About Research Training and Career Development Awards & Opportunities Institutional Training Sites Training Grant Application, Review, and Award Process More Training Resources CME/CEU and Online Lectures Online Continuing Education Series Distinguished Lecture Series Integrative Medicine Research Lecture Series News & Events News & Events Home Press Releases Alerts & Advisories Events Videos NCCIH Clinical Digest About NCCIH About NCCIH Home Organizational Structure Advisory Council Partnerships Director’s Page Strategic Plans & Reports Budget & Legislation Job Opportunities Get Involved Maps & Directions Home Health Information Flaxseed and Flaxseed Oil Flaxseed and Flaxseed Oil © Steven Foster Common Names: flaxseed, flax, linseed Latin Names: Linum usitatissimum Background Flaxseed has a long history of traditional use for health and industrial purposes. Originally cultivated near the Middle East, flaxseed was later used to make linen cloths in ancient Egypt, stews in Ethiopia, and laxatives in ancient Greece. In North America, European settlers used flaxseed to make poultices for cuts and burns and oil for paints. Today, flaxseed and flaxseed oil supplements are promoted for the heart, brain, and immune system. These products typically contain alpha linolenic acid (ALA), an omega-3 fatty acid that has been extracted from flaxseed or flaxseed oil. How Much Do We Know? Some research of varying quality has studied the use of flaxseed or flaxseed oil supplements for several health purposes in people. What Have We Learned? One clinical trial suggests that flaxseed mucilage powder (mixed with water) might support weight loss in adults with overweight or obesity. However, flaxseed lignan extract and flaxseed oil supplements don’t seem to help with weight loss. In pregnant people with gestational diabetes, some research suggests that flaxseed oil supplements containing ALA might improve fasting measures and insulin resistance. More research is needed to study whether flaxseed lignan extract could improve glycemic control or fasting blood glucose in people with type 2 diabetes. It’s unclear whether flaxseed oil supplements could help other people with diabetes, such as those with diabetic foot ulcers. NCCIH recently funded preliminary research to learn more about how flaxseed could affect the gut microbiome and inflammation in the body. What Do We Know About Safety? Don’t eat raw or unripe flaxseeds; they may contain potentially toxic compounds. Limited amounts of flaxseed (especially flaxseed lignan extract or mucilage) or oral flaxseed oil supplements may be safe for use in the short-term (up to 6 months). Higher doses of flaxseed or flaxseed oil supplements may cause uncomfortable digestive symptoms like bloating, fullness, and diarrhea. There are theoretical reasons to suspect that flaxseed or flaxseed oil might interact with other drugs, such as anticoagulant or antiplatelet drugs. If you take any type of medicine, talk with your health care provider before using flaxseed, flaxseed oil, or other herbal products; some herbs and medicines interact in harmful ways. Some studies of the use of flaxseed during pregnancy suggest it is possibly unsafe, but the evidence is not conclusive. Little is known about whether it is safe to use flaxseed while breastfeeding. Little is known about whether it is safe to use flaxseed oil during pregnancy or while breastfeeding. Keep in Mind Take charge of your health—talk with your health care providers about any complementary health approaches you use. Together, you can make shared, well-informed decisions. Federal Regulation of Herbal Products Depending on what’s in them, how they’re intended to be used, and how they’re administered (orally or topically), herbal products are regulated in a variety of ways. Many herbal products intended for oral use are marketed as dietary supplements. The rules for making and distributing dietary supplements are less strict than those for drugs. Unlike drugs, dietary supplements are not approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) before they are sold to the public. When public health concerns arise about the safety of a dietary supplement or an ingredient including an herb, the FDA can take action to protect the public. Manufacturers and distributors of supplements are responsible for evaluating the safety and labeling of their products before marketing to ensure that they meet all regulatory requirements. For More Information Using Dietary Supplements Wisely Know the Science: How Medications and Supplements Can Interact Know the Science: How To Make Sense of a Scientific Journal Article NCCIH Clearinghouse The NCCIH Clearinghouse provides information on NCCIH and complementary and integrative health approaches, including publications and searches of Federal databases of scientific and medical literature. The Clearinghouse does not provide medical advice, treatment recommendations, or referrals to practitioners. Toll-free in the U.S.: 1-888-644-6226 Telecommunications relay service (TRS): 7-1-1 Website: https://www.nccih.nih.gov Email: info@nccih.nih.gov (link sends email) PubMed® A service of the National Library of Medicine, PubMed® contains publication information and (in most cases) brief summaries of articles from scientific and medical journals. For guidance from NCCIH on using PubMed, see How To Find Information About Complementary Health Practices on PubMed . Website: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/ Office of Dietary Supplements (ODS), National Institutes of Health (NIH) ODS seeks to strengthen knowledge and understanding of dietary supplements by evaluating scientific information, supporting research, sharing research results, and educating the public. Its resources include publications (such as Dietary Supplements: What You Need To Know ) and fact sheets on a variety of specific supplement ingredients and products (such as vitamin D and multivitamin/mineral supplements). Website: https://ods.od.nih.gov Email: ods@nih.gov (link sends email) Key References Bongartz U, Hochmann U, Grube B, et al. Flaxseed mucilage (IQP-LU-104) reduces body weight in overweight and moderately obese individuals in a 12-week, three-arm, double-blind, randomized, and placebo-controlled clinical study . Obesity Facts. 2022;15(3):395-404. Flaxseed. NatMed Pro website. Accessed at naturalmedicines.therapeuticresearch.com on March 10, 2024. [Database subscription]. Flaxseed oil. NatMed Pro website. Accessed at naturalmedicines.therapeuticresearch.com on March 10, 2024. [Database subscription]. Jamilian M, Tabassi Z, Reiner Z, et al. The effects of n-3 fatty acids from flaxseed oil on genetic and metabolic profiles in patients with gestational diabetes mellitus: a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial . British Journal of Nutrition. 2020;123(7):792-799. Office of Dietary Supplements. Omega-3 fatty acids. Fact Sheet for Consumers. Accessed at ods.od.nih.gov/factsheets/Omega3FattyAcids-Consumer on November 8, 2023. Thompson LU, Mason JK. Flaxseed. In: Coates PM, Betz JM, Blackman MR, et al., eds. Encyclopedia of Dietary Supplements . 2nd ed. New York, NY: Informa Healthcare; 2010:274-287. Toulabi T, Yarahmadi M, Goudarzi F, et al. Effects of flaxseed on blood pressure, body mass index, and total cholesterol in hypertensive patients: a randomized controlled clinical trial . Explore (NY). 2022;18(4):438-445. This publication is not copyrighted and is in the public domain. Duplication is encouraged. NCCIH has provided this material for your information. It is not intended to substitute for the medical expertise and advice of your health care provider(s). We encourage you to discuss any decisions about treatment or care with your health care provider. The mention of any product, service, or therapy is not an endorsement by NCCIH. Last Updated: February 2025 Share Email Facebook X © Steven Foster Related Topics Herbs at a Glance HerbList App Related Fact Sheets Hypertension (High Blood Pressure) Cholesterol Management at a Glance Menopausal Symptoms: In Depth Diabetes and Dietary Supplements: What You Need To Know Omega-3 Supplements: What You Need To Know Follow NIH: Contact Us X X Facebook Facebook LinkedIn LinkedIn YouTube YouTube Follow NCCIH: Subscribe to our email update Email Updates NCCIH Home National Institutes of Health U.S. Department of Health & Human Services USA.gov 9000 Rockville Pike Bethesda, Maryland 20892 Privacy and Policies Accessibility FOIA Vulnerability Disclosure en Español Site Map NCCIH Website Archive NIH...Turning Discovery Into Health ® Site Last Updated: September 29, 2026 Follow NIH: X X Facebook Facebook LinkedIn LinkedIn YouTube YouTube Follow NCCIH: Subscribe to our email update Email Updates Contact Us Privacy and Policies Accessibility FOIA Vulnerability Disclosure en Español Site Map Archive NCCIH Home National Institutes of Health U.S. Department of Health & Human Services USA.gov 9000 Rockville Pike Bethesda, Maryland 20892 NIH...Turning Discovery Into Health ® Site Last Updated: 