 Fenugreek: Usefulness and Safety | NCCIH Skip to main content Link to External Link Policy An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know NIH Websites Are Changing NIH is moving the launch of its new website to the fall to ensure the best possible experience for everyone who relies on our websites for health information, research, funding opportunities, and other resources. Get the Latest Updates and FAQs . U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Información en Español National Center for Complementary and Integrative Health Health Info Health Info Home Topics A-Z What Is Complementary, Alternative, or Integrative Health? Pain Herbs at a Glance Know the Science Safety Information Resources for Health Care Professionals Tips on Complementary Health Statistics on Use Research Research Home Research Results by Date NCCIH Research Blog Division of Extramural Research Sponsored by NCCIH Division of Intramural Research Conducted at NCCIH Resources for Researchers Clinical Trials NIH Pain Research Center Grants & Funding Grants & Funding Home Overview: What NCCIH Funds Funding Opportunities Clinical Trial Funding Grant Policies & Guidance Application Resources Program Directors Clinical Research Toolbox Types of Grants and Contracts Small Business Research Grant Program (SBIR) General Award Mechanisms Training Training Home About Research Training and Career Development Awards & Opportunities Institutional Training Sites Training Grant Application, Review, and Award Process More Training Resources CME/CEU and Online Lectures Online Continuing Education Series Distinguished Lecture Series Integrative Medicine Research Lecture Series News & Events News & Events Home Press Releases Alerts & Advisories Events Videos NCCIH Clinical Digest About NCCIH About NCCIH Home Organizational Structure Advisory Council Partnerships Director’s Page Strategic Plans & Reports Budget & Legislation Job Opportunities Get Involved Maps & Directions National Center for Complementary and Integrative Health Search Menu Search Search Health Info Health Info Home Topics A-Z What Is Complementary, Alternative, or Integrative Health? Pain Herbs at a Glance Know the Science Safety Information Resources for Health Care Professionals Tips on Complementary Health Statistics on Use Research Research Home Research Results by Date NCCIH Research Blog Division of Extramural Research Sponsored by NCCIH Division of Intramural Research Conducted at NCCIH Resources for Researchers Clinical Trials NIH Pain Research Center Grants & Funding Grants & Funding Home Overview: What NCCIH Funds Funding Opportunities Clinical Trial Funding Grant Policies & Guidance Application Resources Program Directors Clinical Research Toolbox Types of Grants and Contracts Small Business Research Grant Program (SBIR) General Award Mechanisms Training Training Home About Research Training and Career Development Awards & Opportunities Institutional Training Sites Training Grant Application, Review, and Award Process More Training Resources CME/CEU and Online Lectures Online Continuing Education Series Distinguished Lecture Series Integrative Medicine Research Lecture Series News & Events News & Events Home Press Releases Alerts & Advisories Events Videos NCCIH Clinical Digest About NCCIH About NCCIH Home Organizational Structure Advisory Council Partnerships Director’s Page Strategic Plans & Reports Budget & Legislation Job Opportunities Get Involved Maps & Directions Home Health Information Fenugreek Fenugreek © Steven Foster Common Names: fenugreek Latin Names: Trigonella foenum-graecum Background Fenugreek is a clover-like herb native to the Mediterranean region, southern Europe, and western Asia. Its seeds, which smell and taste like maple syrup, have been used as a spice and a traditional medicine. Because of its maple-like flavor, fenugreek has been used as a flavoring agent in foods, beverages, and tobacco. Fenugreek has been used as a medicinal plant for about 6,000 years. In various cultures, it has been used as a tonic or a laxative; as a remedy for menstrual cramps, menopause symptoms, kidney stones, and other conditions; and to stimulate milk production during breastfeeding. Today, fenugreek seed is promoted as a dietary supplement for diabetes, menstrual cramps, and many other conditions and to stimulate milk production during breastfeeding. How Much Do We Know? There is not enough high-quality evidence to determine whether fenugreek is useful for diabetes or menstrual cramps. A few studies have evaluated the use of fenugreek to increase milk supply in breastfeeding women, with mixed results. More high-quality studies are needed before conclusions can be reached about fenugreek’s effects on these conditions. Fenugreek is not safe for use during pregnancy in amounts greater than those found in food; its use has been linked to increased risks of birth defects. What Have We Learned? Research has suggested that fenugreek may help lower blood sugar levels in people with type 2 diabetes, but many of the studies were not of high quality. Only a small number of studies have examined the effect of fenugreek on menstrual cramps. The evidence is of low quality, and the effects of fenugreek on this condition are uncertain. It’s uncertain whether fenugreek can increase milk supply in breastfeeding women; studies have had mixed results. The evidence on fenugreek for other health conditions is too limited for any conclusions to be reached. What Do We Know About Safety? Fenugreek is believed to be safe for adults and children in the amounts commonly found in foods. It is possibly safe for adults in larger amounts. There is not enough information to say whether it is safe for children to take fenugreek in amounts larger than those found in foods. Potential side effects of fenugreek include diarrhea, nausea, and other digestive tract symptoms. Large doses may cause a harmful drop in blood sugar. Fenugreek can cause allergic reactions, including serious reactions, in some people. If you take any type of medicine, talk with your health care provider before using fenugreek or other herbal products; some herbs and medicines interact in harmful ways. Fenugreek is not safe for use during pregnancy in amounts greater than those found in food; its use has been linked to increased risks of birth defects in both animals and people. Little is known about whether it’s safe to use fenugreek in amounts greater than those found in food while breastfeeding. Keep in Mind Take charge of your health—talk with your health care providers about any complementary health approaches you use. Together, you can make shared, well-informed decisions. Federal Regulation of Herbal Products Depending on what’s in them, how they’re intended to be used, and how they’re administered (orally or topically), herbal products are regulated in a variety of ways. Many herbal products intended for oral use are marketed as dietary supplements. The rules for making and distributing dietary supplements are less strict than those for drugs. Unlike drugs, dietary supplements are not approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) before they are sold to the public. When public health concerns arise about the safety of a dietary supplement or an ingredient including an herb, the FDA can take action to protect the public. Manufacturers and distributors of supplements are responsible for evaluating the safety and labeling of their products before marketing to ensure that they meet all regulatory requirements. For More Information Using Dietary Supplements Wisely Know the Science: How Medications and Supplements Can Interact Know the Science: How To Make Sense of a Scientific Journal Article NCCIH Clearinghouse The NCCIH Clearinghouse provides information on NCCIH and complementary and integrative health approaches, including publications and searches of Federal databases of scientific and medical literature. The Clearinghouse does not provide medical advice, treatment recommendations, or referrals to practitioners. Toll-free in the U.S.: 1-888-644-6226 Telecommunications relay service (TRS): 7-1-1 Website: https://www.nccih.nih.gov Email: info@nccih.nih.gov (link sends email) PubMed® A service of the National Library of Medicine, PubMed® contains publication information and (in most cases) brief summaries of articles from scientific and medical journals. For guidance from NCCIH on using PubMed, see How To Find Information About Complementary Health Practices on PubMed . Website: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/ Office of Dietary Supplements (ODS), National Institutes of Health (NIH) ODS seeks to strengthen knowledge and understanding of dietary supplements by evaluating scientific information, supporting research, sharing research results, and educating the public. Its resources include publications (such as Dietary Supplements: What You Need To Know ) and fact sheets on a variety of specific supplement ingredients and products (such as vitamin D and multivitamin/mineral supplements). Website: https://ods.od.nih.gov Email: ods@nih.gov (link sends email) Key References Bernstein N, Akram M, Yaniv-Bachrach Z, et al. Is it safe to consume traditional medicinal plants during pregnancy? Phytotherapy Research. 2021;35(4):1908-1924. Fenugreek. Drugs and Lactation Database. (LactMed). National Institute of Child Health and Human Development. Updated September 2023. Accessed at ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK501779 on October 19, 2023. Fenugreek. LiverTox: Clinical and Research Information on Drug-Induced Liver Injury [Internet]. National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases. Updated January 29, 2018. Accessed at ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK548826 on October 19, 2023. Fenugreek. NatMed Pro website. Accessed at naturalmedicines.therapeuticresearch.com on October 19, 2023. [Database subscription]. Foong SC, Tan ML, Foong WC, et al. Oral galactagogues (natural therapies or drugs) for increasing breast milk production in mothers of non-hospitalised term infants . Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews. 2020;(5):CD011505. Accessed at cochranelibrary.com on October 19, 2023. Forci K, Bouaiti EA, Alami MH, et al. Incidence of neural tube defects and their risk factors within a cohort of Moroccan newborn infants . BMC Pediatrics. 2021;21(1):124. Hassanzadeh R, Shabani F, Montazeri M, et al. The effect of fenugreek on the severity of dysmenorrhea: a systematic review and meta-analysis . Current Drug Research Reviews. 2024;16(2):219-227. Kim J, Noh W, Kim A, et al. The effect of fenugreek in type 2 diabetes and prediabetes: a systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials . International Journal of Molecular Sciences. 2023;24(18):13999. Ouzir M, El Bairi K, Amzazi S. Toxicological properties of fenugreek (Trigonella foenum graecum) . Food and Chemical Toxicology. 2016;96:145-154. Shabil M, Bushi G, Bodige PK, et al. Effect of fenugreek on hyperglycemia: a systematic review and meta-analysis . Medicina (Kaunas). 2023;59(2):248. Visuvanathan T, Than LTL, Stanslas J, et al. Revisiting Trigonella foenum-graecum L.: pharmacology and therapeutic potentialities . Plants (Basel). 2022;11(11):1450. This publication is not copyrighted and is in the public domain. Duplication is encouraged. NCCIH has provided this material for your information. It is not intended to substitute for the medical expertise and advice of your health care provider(s). We encourage you to discuss any decisions about treatment or care with your health care provider. The mention of any product, service, or therapy is not an endorsement by NCCIH. Last Updated: February 2025 Share Email Facebook X © Steven Foster Related Topics Herbs at a Glance HerbList App Follow NIH: Contact Us X X Facebook Facebook LinkedIn LinkedIn YouTube YouTube Follow NCCIH: Subscribe to our email update Email Updates NCCIH Home National Institutes of Health U.S. Department of Health & Human Services USA.gov 9000 Rockville Pike Bethesda, Maryland 20892 Privacy and Policies Accessibility FOIA Vulnerability Disclosure en Español Site Map NCCIH Website Archive NIH...Turning Discovery Into Health ® Site Last Updated: September 29, 2026 Follow NIH: X X Facebook Facebook LinkedIn LinkedIn YouTube YouTube Follow NCCIH: Subscribe to our email update Email Updates Contact Us Privacy and Policies Accessibility FOIA Vulnerability Disclosure en Español Site Map Archive NCCIH Home National Institutes of Health U.S. Department of Health & Human Services USA.gov 9000 Rockville Pike Bethesda, Maryland 20892 NIH...Turning Discovery Into Health ® Site Last Updated: 